Broken PR. Will be deleted (#9924)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/dev/troubleshooting/performance/system/system-clock-drift.md

> # System clock drift
> 
> Synchronized clocks are critical for distributed databases. If system clocks on the {{ ydb-short-name }} servers start to drift too much, distributed transactions might be processed with higher latencies. In some cases {{ ydb-short-name }} might even fail to process distributed transactions and return errors.
> 
> If a {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster contains multiple [coordinators](../../../../concepts/glossary.md#coordinator), planned transactions are merged by [mediators](../../../../concepts/glossary.md#mediator).
> 
> If the system clocks of the nodes that run coordinator tablets differ, transaction latencies grow by the time difference between the fastest and the slowest system clocks. The latency grows because a transaction planned on a node, which system clock is faster, will be executed only after the coordinator with the slowest wall clock reaches that time.
> 
> Moreover, if the system clock drift exceeds 30 seconds, {{ ydb-short-name }} might fail to process distributed transactions. Before coordinators start planning a transaction, affected DataShards determine an acceptable range of timestamps for the transaction. The start of the time range is the current clock time of the mediator tablet. The end time is determined by the planning timeout of 30 seconds. If the system clock of a given coordinator is past this time range of the DataShard, the coordinator cannot plan a distributed transaction for the DataShard, and such queries will always end with an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# System clock drift

Synchronized clocks are critical for distributed databases. If system clocks on the {{ ydb-short-name }} servers drift excessively, distributed transactions will experience increased latencies.

If a {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster contains multiple [coordinators](../../../../concepts/glossary.md#coordinator), planned transactions are merged by [mediators](../../../../concepts/glossary.md#mediator) before being sent off for execution.

If the system clocks of the nodes running the coordinator tablets differ, transaction latencies increase by the time difference between the fastest and slowest system clocks. This occurs because a transaction planned on a node with a faster system clock can only be executed once the coordinator with the slowest clock reaches the same time.

Furthermore, if the system clock drift exceeds 30 seconds, {{ ydb-short-name }} will refuse to process distributed transactions. Before coordinators start planning a transaction, affected DataShards determine an acceptable range of timestamps for the transaction. The start of this range is the current time of the mediator tablet's clock, while the 30-second planning timeout determines the end. If the coordinator's system clock exceeds this time range, it cannot plan a distributed transaction for the DataShard, resulting in errors for such queries.
```

## Diagnostics

To diagnose the system clock drift, use [Embedded UI](../../../../reference/embedded-ui/index.md):

1. In the [Embedded UI](../../../../reference/embedded-ui/index.md), go to the **Databases** tab and click on the database.

1. On the **Navigation** tab, ensure the required database is selected.

1. Open the **Diagnostics** tab.

1. On the **Info** tab, click the **Healthcheck** button.

>     If the **Healthcheck** button has the `MAINTENANCE REQUIRED` status, the {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster might have some problems, including the system clock drift. The diagnosed problems will be listed in the **DATABASE** section under the **Healthcheck** button.

Reviewer: It feels reasonable to add a link to https://ydb.tech/docs/en/reference/ydb-sdk/health-check-api, which covers this in much more detail.

>     If the **Healthcheck** button has the `MAINTENANCE REQUIRED` status, the {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster might have some problems, including the system clock drift. The diagnosed problems will be listed in the **DATABASE** section under the **Healthcheck** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the **Healthcheck** button displays a `MAINTENANCE REQUIRED` status, the {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster might have problems, such as system clock drift. Any identified issues will be listed in the **DATABASE** section beneath the **Healthcheck** button.
```
"Problem" and "issue" aren't always interchangeable. Issues are more generic, while problems are only severe issues that need attention.

1. To see the diagnosed problems, expand the **DATABASE** section.

    ![](_assets/healthcheck-clock-drift.png)

    The system clock drift problems will be listed under `NODES_TIME_DIFFERENCE`.

> {% note info %}

Reviewer: I'd not put these into a note as these are all equal places to look at, and it will likely take comparing a few (if not all of them) to figure out what's actually going on.

You can also use the following methods to diagnose system clock drift:

- Open the [Interconnect overview](../../../../reference/embedded-ui/interconnect-overview.md) page of the [Embedded UI](../../../../reference/embedded-ui/index.md).

> - Use such tools as `pssh` or `ansible` to run the command on all {{ ydb-short-name }} nodes to display the system clock value.

Reviewer: This needs extra clarification:

- Let's highlight that network delays between the host that runs pssh/ansible and YDB hosts will influence the results.
- Let's recommend some specific command to get precise timestamps like `date +%s%N`.
- As we've discussed on the previous iteration, these daemons for time synchronization you mention below on the last line of this file have diagnostics tools that can tell how well do they think they're doing their job, for example, `timedatectl show-timesync --all`. That might be easier to reason about compared to raw timestamps.

{% endnote %}

## Recommendations

1. Sync the system clocks of {{ ydb-short-name }} nodes manually. For example, you can use `pssh` or `ansible` to run the clock sync command on all of the nodes.

> 1. Ensure that system clocks on all of the {{ ydb-short-name }} servers are synced by `ntpd` or `chrony`. It's recommended to use the same time source for all servers in the {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster.

Reviewer: The one that comes with https://ydb.tech/docs/en/devops/ansible/initial-deployment is `timesyncd`, let's add it to the list.
